---
layout: post
title:  GA Week Six Day Five
date:   2017-10-07
hide: true
categories: [blog, coding]
---

Day five means it’s the day we present our projects. That means you’ve got until lunchtime to get it as good as you can without breaking the things that worked yesterday, and it probably means doing a whole lot of, if not all of, your CSS. I pushed my last commit ten minutes before the presentations start, to make usernames case insensitive — a problem I identified yesterday when Dan from the UX class was able to sign up as Dan and I realised he couldn’t then log in as dan. But it got pushed down the to-do list throughout the day, as I went off on tangents like making the buttons not look like default buttons, doing things with the Google Maps API, and making all the pages without Maps on them stop spewing errors to the console. Finally, we had to leave the project somewhere.

**GA Common Area. Just after lunch:**
> “So are you finished?”
> “No, but I stopped.”

I read an article about Robert ‘Mutt’ Lange that said they never reached a point where they were totally happy and ‘finished’ with the mix of Def Leppard’s album Hysteria, but at some point they realised they just had to stop working on it and give it to the label. I read a similar thing about the mix of Where The Streets Have No Name. So I don’t feel so bad about just having to stop working on the project, other than a little regret at spending so much time on blog posts this week instead of my project. So here’s where my idea came from:

**A few years ago:**

My wife and I were eating at Mario’s in Fitzroy. It’s one of those places were musicians come in and eat breakfast at the wrong time of day. One time I went there on the way to the Night Cat on a Sunday night, around 9pm I guess, and ordered poached eggs on toast. The waiter said, “Oh this is so exciting, I only just started working here, and when I moved to Melbourne all I knew about this place was that musicians come in here and order breakfast at the wrong time of day.” I looked over at my bass leaning against the wall and realised I was perpetuating a stereotype. Anyway. A side of unexpected hash browns came out to our table. My cousin was working in the kitchen. We were pretty happy to get those as a side without having ordered breakfast, but you need to know someone in the kitchen.

**Slightly less years ago:**

McDonald’s blow the lid off the impulse-hash-browns scene by offering breakfast all day. You can get hash browns any time you want now.

**A few months ago:**

“Remember that time Joel sent us out some hash browns at Mario’s?”

“Yeah, that was great. I wish you could order sides without having to order something for it to be on the side of.”

**Also a few months ago:**

“Well it’s $9.40 for the pizza…or $10 with a can of soft drink. I should get the can.”

**Ten to fifteen minutes later:**

I don’t even want this drink. I wonder if I can sell it on eBay. A fifteen minute auction, starting price $0.50.

**A few weeks ago:**

Hsing, Trystan, Kasun and I were eating ramen on our lunch break from GA. Kasun realised the small serve wasn’t going to be enough, and ordered a pre-emptive Extra Noodles. When it came out — a small bowl of noodles in broth — Kasun said, “I’d be happy with that for lunch.” But you can’t order it as a side unless you’re ordering a ramen too. That’s when the idea came up. “Wouldn’t it be great if there was an app that found people ordering ramen near you, and you could pay them to order extra noodles?” We laughed. It was a ridiculous idea.

**A few days ago:**

“Maybe it’s not so ridiculous. People near you who want to sell food they don’t need. It could also solve the bundled-drink-I-don’t-need and ordered-too-much-pizza-for-the-meetup problems. Yeah, that’s what I’m going to build.”
