---
layout: post
title:  GA Week Six Day Four
date:   2017-10-05
hide: true
categories: [blog, coding]
---

While trying to think of an app to build for this week’s project, I remembered something that happened to me a few years ago. My line of work involves getting to and from the airport with musical instruments quite often. For guys with instruments that fit in the overhead compartment it’s no harder to get to the airport than it would be for a normal person without musical instruments. But I’m not one of those guys. I’m one of those guys with the musical instrument that won’t fit in most vehicles, let alone the overhead compartment. I’m one of those guys with a double bass.

When I started playing double bass, the worst thing about it was people yelling “Living End!” in public. A few years later, after I got my license, the worst thing about playing double bass was having to drive it everywhere, and then another few years later when I started playing interstate and overseas regularly, the worst thing about playing double bass was how limited my options were for getting it to the airport. I’ve spent the last eighteen or so years coming up with novel ways of doing it. Your score in the game is calculated (it’s not really — this is a hypothetical game, but stick with me here) based on how long it took, how far you had to walk carrying the huge case, and how much it cost. Driving yourself to the airport in your own car isn’t a bad way to go, depending on the length of your trip, but generally the less you pay for parking, the further you are from the terminal and consequently the earlier you’ll have to get there. That’s not so bad if the flight is at midday, but you can’t really put a price on getting up at 6.30am versus getting up at 5.45am. If I absolutely had to put a price on it, I’d say those 45 minutes are worth between 50c and $1.00 each, depending on how much you like sleep. Taxis are usually more expensive than long term parking (depending on where you live and how far the taxi would have to drive you) but they drop you right at the terminal, or at least closer than any parking spot. Unfortunately a double bass probably won’t fit in them, and you don’t want to find that out when you’ve got a plane to catch and all of your eggs are stuck in the taxi basket. And there’s always the grim spectre of “Where’s that taxi? Should I call another one? How long do I wait before I give up on that first one?”

The next rung down the ladder of time-vs-cost-vs-shortest-lug is public transport. Melbourne somehow still doesn’t have a train that goes to the airport, but we do have a bus that leaves from Southern Cross every ten minutes. But I have to catch a tram to Southern Cross first, taking the journey to slightly over an hour door to door, with the added annoyance of having to fit a double bass on a tram. Another option I discovered recently is the airport shuttle that leaves from the backpacker’s at the end of my street. You have to book it in advance, the driver might charge you an arbitrary “bulky luggage” fee that doesn’t seem to be listed on their website, it represents the cheapest ticket to the airport I’ve found, but as it has to pick people up from backpackers’ places all over town it can take over an hour. The cheapest. But the slowest. And highly risky because they don’t always have the luggage trailer, and you might be left stranded on the footpath with nothing but your double bass in your hand.

Loved ones giving you a lift to the airport is not a favour I like to ask for too often. I feel like it’s a bit of an imposition to ask for it all the time. Furthermore, if the flight is during business hours, well as the name implies that’s when people are usually busy doing something else and can’t drive you to the airport. That brings us to my backup plan. Occasionally, very occasionally, there is one way of getting to the airport that works out the best. I’ve only done it once. But it was the best choice on that particular day for that flight at that time in that weather with those instruments. Ladies and gentlemen…

**You can hire a car for less than 24 hours and return it to a different location.**

That’s right. Pick up whatever the cheapest available car is the night before your flight from your closest rental car place, and return it the next morning to their outlet at the airport. You’ll be right at the terminal. If you do it right, it’s cheaper than a taxi. Amazing. As I said, I’ve only done it once, but the satisfaction of finding a cheaper faster way to the airport than ever before really made me feel like I’d grabbed life by the cheatcodes.

So I had a hire car. I wondered, what should I do with it? I’ve got to do something. It’s the smallest van possible. Should I move house? No, I don’t need to. Maybe I could pretend I’m playing Crazy Taxi for a few hours and make back some of the money. Good lord, that would make this an even *cheaper* ride to the airport in the morning! I headed to Facebook.
> Ryan: I’ve got a hire car for 24 hours, does anybody need a ride to the airport?

Of course, what I meant was, “Does anybody need a ride to the airport at the same time that I’m driving to the airport?” But leaving that last bit out meant I got a response pretty quickly. Yes, Marty needed a lift to the airport. I thought, “What the hell, I haven’t got much on today, I’m going to drive Marty to the airport.” Unfortunately, to save money on the hire car I had cheaped out on the insurance, which made the excess an eye-watering $1800 or something similarly eye-watering. So I had to be careful with that thing. You know what I did? I drove Marty to the airport in MY OWN CAR. Think about it. It was a better idea than risking damaging the hire car, however unlikely that may be. So I picked Marty up in Northcote, drove him out to Tullamarine, dropped him at the terminal, and then sat in peak hour city-bound airport traffic for 45 minutes. I think he gave me $20. That gave me an idea. “This would make a whole lot more sense if I just charged people to carpool to the airport when I’m going there anyway.” Wouldn’t it be great if there was an app that found people between my house and the airport who wanted a lift there right now?

But sadly, that’s not my app idea for my project. Inventing the Uber of ridesharing is pretty much just inventing Uber.
