---
layout: post
title:  GA Week Five Day Two
date:   2017-09-27
hide: true
categories: [blog, coding]
---

Don’t bother scrolling back to see if there are any more of these. There aren’t. I didn’t get around to starting until now. But I’ve been planning to since way back on day one of week one. Ah, week one. I remember those days. Winter was almost due to pack its bags and head down to the lobby, but just like every year in Melbourne it overstayed its welcome, casually dismissing the alarm and waiting for housekeeping to knock on the door, then pretending it was an accident.

But I should probably give you some context. GA is General Assembly, a “pioneer in education and career transformation, specializing in today’s most in-demand skills” (that’s from their website) with 20 campuses worldwide. WDI is Web Development Immersive — a 12-week course that GA runs. And me? I’m a professional musician in Melbourne; professional in the sense that it’s my only job, and also in the sense that I show up on time, learn the material before I get to the rehearsal, and take my glass back to the bar when I’m finished with it. Also, I’m learning web development. Let’s continue.

Way back then, in week one, we were told that blogging (or ‘writing’, as they used to call it) might be a good way to collect your thoughts and keep track of your progress in the course, if you’re into that sort of thing. “Hey, I’ve been into [that](http://ryancoffee.blogspot.com) sort of thing before, maybe I could be again!” I thought. But the reason I haven’t written anything yet is it’s gone pretty quickly, and most of my time has been spent at school learning about web development. And when I’m not there I’m probably doing homework. And when I’m not doing that I’m reading about other web development related things. And when I’m not doing that I’m opening article upon article on Medium in a new tab so I can read them later. The scary thing is we’re almost halfway through week five. Out of twelve. No matter whether you call it “we were a third of the way through last Friday” or “next Friday we’ll be at the HALFWAY point”, this course is going by fast.

But here’s the update for today. It’s all coming together. I can see the light. We can make web pages in HTML, define how they are presented with CSS, make them do things with Javascript. As of last week, we started learning Ruby and now we can write apps that run in the backend (on the web server, to sum it up almost too briefly) to generate those pages. And today our Ruby apps started talking to databases. And we learned it all in the last five weeks. It’s all coming together. I can see the light. The kind of light that took me about two years to see last time I studied web development, but **Learning Coding at a Bootcamp vs Learning Coding at a University** is surely a topic for another entire post. Don’t worry, I’ll come up with a better title when I write it.

There’s been a lot of database talk so far this week. We’ve talked about databases so much that the acronym CRUD isn’t even funny anymore. Not everybody has the kind of mind that can find databases interesting, but you can’t deny they’re important. They’re behind almost everything. Don’t forget: Larry Ellison has his own Hawaiian [island](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lanai). Databases are a big deal. We’ve been using PostgreSQL, which always seemed intimidating to me because of how unpronounceable it looks, so it was a relief to see how easy it is to install with [Postgres.app](http://postgresapp.com/), and comforting to know that even the PostgreSQL website doesn’t quite know how to pronounce it and had to conduct a [survey](https://www.postgresql.org/community/survey/33-how-do-you-pronounce-postgresql/).

Also, some LinkedIn related stuff happened but I’m going for a reading time somewhere between “tweet” and “I don’t have time for this” so I’ll save it for tomorrow.

Quote of the day: *“If you wanted to be a dick you could just use GET requests for everything.”*
