---
layout: post
title:  GA Week Six Day One
date:   2017-10-02
hide: true
categories: [blog, coding]
---

The web is stateless by nature, but that has nothing to do with Lene Lovich’s hit 1978 album Stateless. What it has to do with is the web really just serves documents, and it takes a great deal of work to make it do something like this:

Oh, welcome back Ryan, here’s some products you’ve clicked on but didn’t buy in the past. Maybe you want to buy them this time.

Whether I fall for their ploy or not, the site is convinced I am who I say I am, remembers I’ve been there before, remembers what I did, and can act accordingly. And that’s exactly the sort of thing we’re building now too. It’s the third week of our second block of three weeks, and that means we have another project. This one is a little more open-ended than last time, we’re free to choose our own adventure as long as it’s a full stack web adventure that talks to a database. That leaves plenty of room to move. I was stuck for ideas at first, and turned to something we wrote way back in week one.

`startupIdea();`

That’s right, we wrote a startup idea generator. It takes an array (that’s a list, if you’re not familiar) of industries and an array of apps, picks a random one from each and spits out an idea. To get my daylight-saving-time-difference-addled brain into gear I ran it a few times.

Bang With Friends for Pets

Cloud Storage Provider for Your Mom

Pinterest for Ex-Girlfriends

Deal Finder for Alcoholics

Airbnb for Your Aquarium

You get the idea. Some of them don’t make sense. Some of them make you google things (Bang With Friends). Some of them, incredibly, already exist. But I realised for the project I’d just have to scroll back through my mental log of “Too bad there isn’t an app for ___ ” thoughts. That should lead somewhere. If not to an amazing app that doesn’t exist but people need but don’t realise they need yet and nobody else realises they need yet, then at least to something I can build in the next four days.
> “The object of the action is becoming clear.”

That’s from Lene Lovich’s 1978 hit Lucky Number from the aforementioned 1978 album Stateless. I knew it would be relevant eventually.
