---
layout: post
title:  GA Week Six Day Two
date:   2017-10-03
hide: true
categories: [blog, coding]
---

Days here usually start with a warmup: a short coding exercise that you can get done in an hour, or ideally less than an hour so you have time to go and get some more coffee. It’s great to start off the day with an exercise like that, and then discuss it and see how other people tackled it. It’s always amazing to see how differently we all approach the problem, and a novel, concise but readable solution is always inspiring to see. But this week it’s project week, and all we’re doing is working on our individual projects, so there was no warmup today. I really missed it. So I decided to make my own warmup.
>  “Take the l out of lover and it’s over.”

That’s from Take the L by The Motels; side one, track two on their third album All Four One, released in 1982. Remember that song? Don’t worry, I barely do either. But every time I hear it I’m a little disappointed that it doesn’t quite make sense. Sure, if you remove the letter l from the word ‘lover’ it literally does spell the word ‘over’. But big deal. This isn’t a spelling bee. It’s only worth mentioning in the chorus of a song if it also means something figurative. For an example: “there’s no I in team”. That’s clever. Not because it’s correct that the letter i does not occur in the word team, but because it has a second meaning about what it means to be in a team. That’s why people say it. I know it was 35 years ago and that water is so far under the bridge it’s almost not worth discussing but I feel like the Motels really missed an opportunity. Take the l? What the hell is an ‘l’? Every time I hear it I wonder if there are any other words they could have used to come up with something better.

Which brings me to my warmup for this morning. Write a program which outputs to the console ten lines of lyrics based on the form “take the x out of y and it’s z”, where x is a letter of the alphabet, y is a word containing x, and z is a word formed by removing x from y. To cut a long story short, [here’s](https://gist.github.com/ryanmonro/338bbce8ab4c6750e53d890e49dc5435) my answer, and here’s some sample output:

    # Take the a out of asynchronism and it’s synchronism
    # Take the u out of arbuscule and it’s arbuscle
    # Take the a out of alone and it’s lone
    # Take the e out of unfeather and it’s unfather
    # Take the i out of soldiering and it’s soldering
    # Take the s out of nonunison and it’s nonunion
    # Take the w out of lawyer and it’s layer
    # Take the n out of venal and it’s veal
    # Take the t out of rotundly and it’s roundly
    # Take the i out of painting and it’s panting

As you can see, none of them are particularly good (except maybe that last one, which says I’m better off painting the house myself than trying to get my dog to do it) or songworthy, but none of them are much worse than the one in the song. But it was still a good warmup. Hopefully I hear another song tomorrow morning that makes me want to write some code.
